
Title: **DEP-0005: DNS**

Short Name: `0005-dns`

Type: Informative

Status: Draft (as of 2018-04-27)

Github PR: [PR#25](https://github.com/datprotocol/DEPs/pull/25)

Authors: Paul Frazee


# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Dat's data structures (HyperCore, HyperDB, and HyperDrive) are addressed using
cryptographic keys. In the context of Web browsers, a URL scheme is used which
is structured as `'dat://' {key} '/' {path...}`.

This DEP describes an additional protocol for addressing Dats using DNS short names.


# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

The cryptographic keys which address Dats are secure and global, but not human-readable. This creates a usability problem.

The goal of this DEP is to leverage DNS to provide human-readable shortnames which map to Dat's cryptographic addresses. The solution...

 - Must provide a single canonical Dat URL for the domain. It should not be possible for a name to have multiple valid mappings. (No conflict.)
 - Must not be controllable by non-owners of the domain. It should not be possible for third parties to modify the mapping. (Secure.)
 - Should be accessible to as many users as possible. (Convenient.)

An initial proposal (the [".well-known solution"](https://web.archive.org/web/20171013151452/https://github.com/beakerbrowser/beaker/wiki/Authenticated-Dat-URLs-and-HTTPS-to-Dat-Discovery)) has had prior usage in the Beaker Browser and Dat CLI. A followup proposal (the ["DNS TXT solution"](https://web.archive.org/web/20180427202745/https://github.com/beakerbrowser/beaker/wiki/Dat-DNS-TXT-records-with-optional-DNS-over-HTTPS)) was made recently, but has not yet been deployed. This DEP intends to unify these proposals formally.


# Usage Documentation
[usage-documentation]: #usage-documentation

Users may provide a Dat URL to clients with the following structure: `'dat://' {name} '/'`. 

If the `name` is a 64-character hex string, it should be considered a "key" and no DNS-resolution should occur. If `name` matches the following RegExp, it is considered a "key":

```
^[0-9a-f]{64}$
```

If the `name` does not match this RegExp, it is a "domain name" and requires resolution. A Dat client should follow the [resolution process](#resolution-process) to do this.

```
domain: dat://beakerbrowser.com/
key:    dat://87ed2e3b160f261a032af03921a3bd09227d0a4cde73466c17114816cae43336/
```

Users have multiple options for creating a domain-name mapping.

## DNS TXT record
[usage-dns-txt-record]: #usage-dns-txt-record

The first option is to set a DNS TXT record at the domain which maps to a "key"-addressed Dat URL. The client will lookup this TXT record first and load the resulting Dat. That record should fit the following schema:

```
datkey={key}
```

The minimum TTL is `1800` (30 minutes). TTL durations of weeks and months are encurraged to reduce the dependency on DNS unless you expect to change your Dat key. Start out with a short TTL and increase it over time.

## .well-known/dat
[usage-wellknown-dat]: #usage-wellknown-dat

The second option is to run an HTTPS server at the domain name which includes a `/.well-known/dat` resource. That resource should provide a text file with the following schema:

```
dat://{key}
TTL={time in seconds}
```

`TTL` is optional and will default to `1800` (30 minutes). This is also the minimum TTL. TTL durations of weeks and months are encurraged to reduce the dependency on your HTTPS Server unless you expect to change your Dat key. Start out with a short TTL and increase it over time.


# Resolution process
[resolution-process]: #resolution-process

Resolution of a Dat at `dat://{name}` should follow this process:

- Client issues a DNS TXT request for `name`. This request should be issued via a secure transport (see ["DNS-over-HTTPS"](#dns-over-https)).
 - Client iterates all TXT records given (skip if none). If a record's value matches the TXT record schema (see below):
   - Caache the record as described below.
   - Return the record value.
 - Client issues an HTTPS GET request to `https://{name}/.well-known/dat`.
   - If the server responds with a `404 Not Found` status, client stores a `null` entry in the names cache with a TTL of 3600 and returns a failed lookup.
   - If the server responds with anything other than a `200 OK` status, return a failed lookup.
   - If the server responds with a malformed file (see below), return a failed lookup.
   - If the server responds with a well-formed file, cache the record as described below, and return the record value.


The DNS TXT record must match this schema:

```
'datkey=' [0-9a-f]{64}
```

The `/.well-known/dat` file must match this schema:

```
'dat://' [0-9a-f]{64} '/'?
( 'TTL=' [0-9]* )?
```

Note that DNS-record responses may not follow a pre-defined order. Therefore the results of a lookup may be undefined if multiple TXT records exist.


Name cache lookup process:

Name cache entries has four qualifies: origin (domain name : port), Dat key, first seen timestamp, and expiration timestamp. Timestamps are in seconds since the Unix epoch.

- Client must check if the origin is in the cache.
  - If the origin is not in the cache, client must perform resolution for the origin using the method described above.
    - If the domain doesn't resolve, the cache lookup returns a failed lookup.
    - If the domain resolves, add the origin; Dat key; set the current time as first seen timestap, and set the expiration timestamp to exactly 30 minutes.
  - If the origin is in the cache, client must check if the expiration timestamp is now or in the future.
    - If it's now or in the future, return the cached Dat key.
      - Clients may oppertunisticly asyncronously renew cached entries that are ten minutes or less from expiring.
    - If it's in the past, the client must resolve the origin using the method described above.
      - If the resolution fails due to a server error (HTTP status code 5XX) or connection time out, and the expiration time is less than one week ago, return the cached Dat key.
      - If the resoluton fails for any other reason or the expiration time is more than one week ago, then the name record should be deleted from the cache and return a failed lookup.
      - If the resolution succeeded then the client must compare the previously cached Dat key to the newly resolved Dat key.
        - If the two keys differ, then the cached key is replaced; set the current time to the first seen timestamp, and set the expiration timestamp to exactly 30 minutes.
         - If the two keys are identical, renew the cache expiration timestamp using the following criteria:
           - First number: Subtract the first seen timestamp from the current time and multiply by two; add the resulting number to the current timestamp. Second number: add the resolved TTL to the current time.
             - Client sets the expiration timestamp to the smaller of the two resulting numbers.
             - Client should enforce a minimum expiration time of 30 minutes and a maximum of 6 months.
             - Return the resolved Dat key.
- Client should remove expired entries 30 days after expiration.
- After six months, client may set the first seen timestamp to the beginning of the Unix epoch.

# Security and Privacy
[security-and-privacy]: #security-and-privacy

Two issues to consider:

 - **Security**: Can we trust the lookup results for a name?
 - **Privacy**: Who sees the DNS lookups?

Traditional DNS provides neither security or privacy. All looks occur over plaintext UDP. To provide security, a separate system must authenticate the record. (In the case of HTTPS records, the SSL Certificate provides authentication.)

Dat does not currently have a DNS authentication record (no equivalent to the SSL certificate). Therefore a lookup using UDP can not be secured.

To solve this, this DEP recommends using [DNS-over-HTTPS](#dns-over-https). 


## DNS-over-HTTPS
[dns-over-https]: #dns-over-https

Until PKI can authenticate the DNS lookups (ie via SSL certificates or equivalent) there is a risk that the DNS lookup will be intercepted by an adversary. To protect against this, the client should use DNS-over-HTTPS to lookup the DNS TXT records.

Current providers:

 - [Google](https://developers.google.com/speed/public-dns/docs/dns-over-https)
 - [Cloudflare](https://developers.cloudflare.com/1.1.1.1/dns-over-https/json-format/)

This solution improves on both the security and privacy of DNS lookup:

 - **Security**. Requests to the DNS provider are authenticated using the provider's SSL certificate.
 - **Privacy**. DNS lookups are encrypted on the wire and only made visible to the DNS provider.

DNS-over-HTTPS still requires trust in the provider to give correct responses, but this is an improvement to UDP DNS lookups, which can be trivially MITMed by malicious actors on the network.

Whereas traditional DNS leaks name lookups to everyone on the network, DNS-over-HTTPS only reveals them to the DNS provider. This still provides some opportunity for tracking, but the opportunity is reduced to the provider alone.


# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

 - The use of the `.well-known/dat` resource over HTTPS creates a dependency on a service.
 - DNS-over-HTTPS exposes all lookups to the provider and relies on the provider to be honest. However, because this method offsets the risk of MITM attacks, this is a worthwhile trade. Future DEPs should find alternative ways to authenticate domain-name records.


# Rationale and alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

- User-defined names registries could be used instead of DNS, but they would likely suffer from name conflicts without a top-down control.
- A blockchain (such as Namecoin) could be used instead of DNS, but blockchains currently have poor throughput and require users to sync large amounts of data.
- DNSSEC could be used instead of DNS-over-HTTPS, but it does not have the same level of support among gTLDs that DNS-over-HTTPS has.


# Changelog
[changelog]: #changelog

- 2019-02-18: Increase resolution caching time linearly as cofidence in resolved result increases.
- 2018-04-27: First complete draft submitted for review
- 2018-05-07: Add "Security and Privacy" section and rewrite DNS TXT record schema.
- 2018-05-16: Merged as Draft after WG approval.

